RSDK-2262 Docs changes for "Cloud story for SLAM" and "IMU Support for Cartographer" (#2011)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/services/slam/cartographer/_index.md

In addition, you must [add the `rplidar` module to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/examples/rplidar/) to support the RPlidar hardware, if you have not done so already.

Currently, the `rplidar` and `cartographer` modules support the Linux platform only.

Physically connect the RPlidar to your robot.

If you have a Viam Rover and are mounting an RPlidar to your rover, be sure to position the RPlidar so that it faces forward in the direction of travel, facing in the same direction as the included webcam.
For example, if you are using the [RPlidar A1](https://www.slamtec.com/en/Lidar/A1) model, mount it to the Rover so that the **pointed** end of the RPlidar mount housing points in the direction of the front of the Rover.

If you need a **mount plate** for your RPlidar A1 or A3 model, you can 3D print an adapter plate using the following:

- [RPlidar A1 adapter STL](https://github.com/viamrobotics/Rover-VR1/blob/master/CAD/RPIidarA1_adapter.STL)
- [RPlidar A3 adapter STL](https://github.com/viamrobotics/Rover-VR1/blob/master/CAD/RPIidarA3_adapter.STL)

### Create new map

#### Configuration for creating a new map

> Because Cartographer's algorithm is CPU-intensive especially for creating or updating a map, in this mode the **`cartographer-module` on your robot acts as a stub**, and the algorithm actually executes in the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Your robot's sensor data will be **captured continuously** using Viam's Data Capture while the robot is running, and the data from when you click "Start session" until you click "End session" will be used to create the map. See [View the map being created](#view-the-map-being-created) for details about starting and stopping a cloud slam session.

Reviewer 2: [q]should we link to data capture here?

Author: done!

#### View your robot localizing on the map

Navigate to the **Control** tab on your robot's page and click on the drop-down menu matching the `name` of the service you created.

Unlike when creating or updating a map, you do not need to start and end a slam session.

The pointcloud for the existing map will appear **immediately** and Cartographer will try to find your robot's position on it.

Since the map will not change, nothing new will be added to this robot's location's **SLAM library**.

![slam RC card localize only](/services/slam/slam-RC-card-localize-only.png)

{{% alert title="Info" color="info" %}}

Cartographer may take several minutes to find your robot's position on the existing map. In the meantime, your robot will show up at the map's origin (i.e., (x,y) coordinates (0,0)).

If you move your robot, it will appear to be moving in a trajectory from the map's origin.

{{% /alert %}}

## Offline mode

In this mode, you specify a range of **previously captured** LiDAR and optional IMU data to create a map or update an existing map in the cloud.

### Requirements

> You can browse your previously captured data from the **Data** page. You must have at least previously captured LiDAR data in the location in which you would like to create the map.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can browse your previously captured data from the **Data** page.
To create a map, you must have already captured LiDAR data in the location in which you would like to create the map.
```

Example of previously captured LiDAR data (note, you can click on a row to see the `Robot ID` of the robot the component belonged to):

> ![offline mapping pointcloud data](/services/slam/offline-mapping-pointcloud-data.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{<imgproc src="/services/slam/offline-mapping-pointcloud-data.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true alt="UI showing captured point clouds">}}
```

Example of previously captured IMU data:

> ![offline mapping imu data](/services/slam/offline-mapping-imu-data.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{<imgproc src="/services/slam/offline-mapping-imu-data.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true alt="UI showing captured sensor data">}}
```

### Configuration

Navigate to the **SLAM library** tab on your Location page, and click either `"Make new map"` on the top right, or `"Update map"` next to any map.

1. If you clicked `"Make new map`", specify a map name.
1. Enter the `"Robot name"`, `"Camera name"`, and optionally the `"Movement Sensor name"` of the components whose previously captured data should be used to create or update the map. If your robot has been deleted, you can alternatively specify the `"robot ID`".
1. Adjust the config parameters as needed. See [config_params](#config_params) for details.
1. Select the timeframe of the data you'd like to use.

> 1. At the bottom, you will be able to see the total number of PCD files and movement sensor data points that will be processed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. At the bottom, you can see the total number of PCD files and movement sensor data points that will be processed.
```

1. Click `"Generate map"`.

> ![offline mapping generate map](/services/slam/offline-mapping-generate-map.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{<imgproc src="/services/slam/offline-mapping-generate-map.png" resize="1200px" declaredimensions=true alt="UI for creating a new map from captured data">}}
```

Currently, the `rplidar` and `cartographer` modules support the Linux platform only.

Physically connect the RPlidar to your robot.

If you have a Viam Rover and are mounting an RPlidar to your rover, be sure to position the RPlidar so that it **faces forward in the direction of travel**, facing in the same direction as the included webcam.
For example, if you are using the [RPlidar A1](https://www.slamtec.com/en/Lidar/A1) model, mount it to the Rover so that the **pointed** end of the RPlidar mount housing points in the direction of the front of the Rover.

If you need a **mount plate** for your RPlidar A1 or A3 model, you can 3D print an adapter plate using the following:

- [RPlidar A1 adapter STL](https://github.com/viamrobotics/Rover-VR1/blob/master/CAD/RPIidarA1_adapter.STL)
- [RPlidar A3 adapter STL](https://github.com/viamrobotics/Rover-VR1/blob/master/CAD/RPIidarA3_adapter.STL)

### Configuration

> #### Create new map

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Create a new map
```

Because Cartographer's algorithm is CPU-intensive, especially for creating or updating a map, the **`cartographer-module` on your robot acts as a stub** in this mode and the algorithm executes in the cloud.

> Your robot's sensor data will be **captured continuously** using Viam's [Data Capture](/services/data/configure-data-capture/) while the robot is running, and the data from when you click "Start session" until you click "End session" will be used to create the map. See [View the map being created](#view-the-map-being-created) for details about starting and stopping a cloud slam session.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Your robot's sensor data will be **captured continuously** using Viam's [Data Capture](/services/data/configure-data-capture/) service while the robot is running, and the data from when you click "Start session" until you click "End session" will be used to create the map.
See [View the map being created](#view-the-map-being-created) for details about starting and stopping a cloud slam session.
```

1. Select **SLAM**, then select `cartographer`.
   You can also search for "cartographer".
1. Click **Add module**, give your service a name of your choice, then click **Create**.
1. In the resulting `SLAM` service configuration pane, from the `"Mapping mode"` dropdown, choose `"Create new map"`
1. Configure the rest of the **Attributes** as follows:

   - `"Camera"`: Select the `name` of the camera component that you created when you [added the `rplidar` module to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/examples/rplidar/). Example: "my-rplidar"
       - Then set a `"Data capture rate (Hz)"` for it. Example: "5"
   - `"Movement Sensor (Optional)"`: Select the `name` of a movement sensor component that implements the `GetAngularVelocity` and `GetLinearAcceleration` methods of the movement sensor API. Example: "my-imu"
       - Then set a `"Data capture rate (Hz)"` for it. Example: "20"

>    - `"Minimum range (meters)"`: Set the minimum range of your `rplidar`. See [config params](#config_params) for suggested values for RPLidar A1 and A3.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - `"Minimum range (meters)"`: Set the minimum range of your `rplidar`. See [`config params`](#config_params) for suggested values for RPLidar A1 and A3.
```

>    - `"Maximum range (meters)"`: Set the maximum range of your `rplidar`. See [config params](#config_params) for suggested values for RPLidar A1 and A3.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - `"Maximum range (meters)"`: Set the maximum range of your `rplidar`. See [`config params`](#config_params) for suggested values for RPLidar A1 and A3.
```

> If you would like to tune additional Cartographer parameters, you can expand `"Show additional parameters"`. See the [config_params](#config_params) section for more information on the other parameters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you would like to tune additional Cartographer parameters, you can expand `"Show additional parameters"`.
See the [`config_params`](#config_params) section for more information on the other parameters.
```

        "config_params": {
          "max_range_meters": "25",
          "mode": "2d",
          "min_range_meters": "0.2"
        },
        "camera": {
          "name": "rplidar",
          "data_frequency_hz": "5"
        },
        "enable_mapping": true,
        "use_cloud_slam": true
      },
      "name": "slam",
      "type": "slam",
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "model": "viam:slam:cartographer"
    },
    {
      "name": "Data-Management-Service",
      "type": "data_manager",
      "attributes": {
        "tags": [],
        "additional_sync_paths": [],
        "sync_interval_mins": 0.1,
        "capture_dir": ""
      }
    }
  ],
  "components": [
    {
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "attributes": {},
      "depends_on": [],
      "service_configs": [
        {
          "attributes": {
            "capture_methods": [
              {
                "disabled": false,
                "method": "NextPointCloud",
                "capture_frequency_hz": 5
              }
            ]
          },
          "type": "data_manager"
        }
      ],
      "name": "rplidar",
      "model": "viam:lidar:rplidar",
      "type": "camera"
    }
  ]
}
```

{{% /expand%}}

> #### Update existing map

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Update an existing map
```

> This mode is similar to [Create new map](#create-new-map), except it creates a new version of an existing map in the robot's location. (It does not overwrite the old version of the map.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This mode is similar to [Create a new map](#create-a-new-map), except it creates a new version of an existing map in the robot's location. (It does not overwrite the old version of the map.)
```

> The configuration is similar to the configuration for [creating a new map](#create-new-map), except you additionally configure the following **Attribute**:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The configuration is similar to the configuration for [creating a new map](#create-a-new-map), except you additionally configure the following **Attribute**:
```

Reviewer 3: This sentence is also almost identical to the preceding. Might it be possible to combine them?

        "existing_map": "${packages.slam_map.test-map-1}/internalState.pbstream"
      },
      "name": "slam",
      "type": "slam",
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "model": "viam:slam:cartographer"
    },
    {
      "name": "Data-Management-Service",
      "type": "data_manager",
      "attributes": {
        "tags": [],
        "additional_sync_paths": [],
        "sync_interval_mins": 0.1,
        "capture_dir": ""
      }
    }
  ],
  "components": [
    {
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "attributes": {},
      "depends_on": [],
      "service_configs": [
        {
          "attributes": {
            "capture_methods": [
              {
                "disabled": false,
                "method": "NextPointCloud",
                "capture_frequency_hz": 5
              }
            ]
          },
          "type": "data_manager"
        }
      ],
      "name": "rplidar",
      "model": "viam:lidar:rplidar",
      "type": "camera"
    }
  ],
  "packages": [
    {
      "name": "test-map-1",
      "version": "1697208847",
      "package": "d1c224e8-483e-4cc7-980f-76b89d8fb507/test-map-1",
      "type": "slam_map"
    }
  ]
}
```

{{% /expand%}}

#### Localize only

> In this mode, the cartographer-module on your robot executes the Cartographer algorithm itself locally.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this mode, the `cartographer-module` on your robot executes the Cartographer algorithm itself locally.
```

> The configuration is similar to the configuration for [updating an existing map](#update-existing-map), except instead of setting a `Data capture rate (Hz)` on the camera and movement sensor, you set a `Data polling rate (Hz)` on them, since the `cartographer-module` on your robot will poll the live LiDAR and IMU directly at these rates instead of the data being sent to the cloud.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The configuration is similar to the configuration for [updating an existing map](#update-an-existing-map), except instead of configuring a `Data capture rate (Hz)` on the camera and movement sensor, set a `Data polling rate (Hz)` for both. The `cartographer-module` on your robot polls the live LiDAR and IMU directly at these rates, wheras the capture rate is only used when data is being sent to the cloud.
```

      "type": "registry",
      "name": "viam_rplidar",
      "module_id": "viam:rplidar",
      "version": "0.1.14"
    },
    {
      "type": "registry",
      "name": "viam_cartographer",
      "module_id": "viam:cartographer",
      "version": "0.3.36"
    }
  ],
  "services": [
    {
      "type": "slam",
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "model": "viam:slam:cartographer",
      "attributes": {
        "config_params": {
          "min_range_meters": "0.2",
          "max_range_meters": "25",
          "mode": "2d"
        },
        "camera": {
          "name": "rplidar",
          "data_frequency_hz": "5"
        },
        "enable_mapping": false,
        "use_cloud_slam": false,
        "existing_map": "${packages.slam_map.test-map-1}/internalState.pbstream"
      },
      "name": "slam"
    }
  ],
  "components": [
    {
      "model": "viam:lidar:rplidar",
      "type": "camera",
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "attributes": {},
      "depends_on": [],
      "name": "rplidar"
    }
  ],
  "packages": [
    {
      "type": "slam_map",
      "name": "test-map-1",
      "version": "1697208847",
      "package": "d1c224e8-483e-4cc7-980f-76b89d8fb507/test-map-1"
    }
  ]
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: Per the paragraph directly above this sample, I would expect a `movement_sensor` object of form `{ "name": <string>, "data_frequency_hz": <int> }` in this configuration too.

### View the Map

#### "Create new map" mode

Navigate to the **Control** tab on your robot's page and click on the drop-down menu matching the `name` of the service you created.

Enter a name for your new map and click `"Start session"`, then wait for the slam session to finish starting up in the cloud, which **takes about 2 minutes**.

Make sure to either **manually refresh**, or **change the refresh frequency** to something other than `Manual`.

![slam RC card start session](/services/slam/slam-RC-card-start-session.png)

While the slam session is starting, you will see a loading screen.

![slam RC card wait for session to finish starting](/services/slam/slam-RC-card-wait-for-session-to-finish-starting.png)

Once the slam session has finished starting, your first pointcloud will appear.

![slam RC card first pointcloud](/services/slam/slam-RC-card-first-pointcloud.png)

You will be able to see that your cloud slam session is in progress from your **Location** page's **SLAM library** tab.

![offline mapping maps computing table](/services/slam/offline-mapping-maps-computing-table.png)

> When you would like to end the slam session, back on the robot's **Control** tab, click `"End session"`. If you do not click `"End session"`, the slam session will automatically be ended after 45 minutes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you would like to end the slam session, return to your robot's **Control** tab, and click `"End session"`.
If you do not click `"End session"`, the slam session will automatically be ended after 45 minutes.
```

Reviewer 3: Question: "after 45 minutes" of inactivity? Of no data received by cloud compute? Or is it a hardcoded 45m elapsed since start regardless?

Reviewer 2: hardcoded, though its actually hardcoded to 50 minutes in the backend

> Once the session has ended, the map will be saved to your **Location** page's **SLAM library** tab.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the session has ended, the map is available from your **Location** page's **SLAM library** tab.
```

![offline mapping available maps](/services/slam/offline-mapping-available-maps.png)

You can click `View map` to view the map in a dynamic pointcloud viewer.

![slam library view map](/services/slam/slam-library-view-map.png)

#### "Update existing map" mode

This is similar to [viewing the map in "create new map" mode](#create-new-map-mode), except it builds on top of an existing map.

{{% alert title="Info" color="info" %}}

> Cartographer may take several minutes to find your robot's position on the existing map. In the meantime, your robot will show up at the map's origin (i.e., (x,y) coordinates (0,0)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cartographer may take several minutes to find your robot's position on the existing map.
Until the current position is determined, your robot will appear at the map's origin (the (x,y) coordinates `(0,0)`).
```

You may not want to move your robot until it has localized correctly.

{{% /alert %}}

#### "Localize only" mode

Navigate to the **Control** tab on your robot's page and click on the drop-down menu matching the `name` of the service you created.

> Unlike when creating or updating a map, you do not need to start and end a slam session. The pointcloud for the existing map will appear **immediately** and Cartographer will try to find your robot's position on it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unlike when creating or updating a map, you do not need to start and end a slam session in "localize only" mode.
The pointcloud for the existing map will appear **immediately** and Cartographer will try to find your robot's position on it.
```

> Since the map will not change, nothing new will be added to this robot's location's **SLAM library**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In "localize only" mode, the maps under your robot's location's **SLAM library** do not change.
```

![slam RC card localize only](/services/slam/slam-RC-card-localize-only.png)

{{% alert title="Info" color="info" %}}

> Cartographer may take several minutes to find your robot's position on the existing map. In the meantime, your robot will show up at the map's origin (i.e., (x,y) coordinates (0,0)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cartographer may take several minutes to find your robot's position on the existing map.
Until the current position is determined, your robot will appear at the map's origin (the (x,y) coordinates `(0,0)`).
```

If you move your robot, it will appear to be moving in a trajectory from the map's origin.

{{% /alert %}}

## Offline mode

In this mode, you specify a range of **previously captured** LiDAR and optional IMU data to create a map or update an existing map in the cloud.

### Requirements

> You can browse your previously captured data from the **Data** page.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can browse your previously captured data from the **Data** page under the **Point clouds** tab.
```

To create a map, you must have already captured LiDAR data in the location in which you would like to create the map.

> Example of previously captured LiDAR data (note, you can click on a row to see the `Robot ID` of the robot the component belonged to):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example shows the previously-captured LiDAR data of a robot named `test` under the **Point clouds** tab.
Selecting a row opens a pane to the right that contains more information, such as the `Robot ID` of the robot the component belongs to:
```

{{<imgproc src="/services/slam/offline-mapping-pointcloud-data.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true alt="UI showing captured point clouds">}}

> Example of previously captured IMU data:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example shows the previously-captured IMU data for that same robot under the **Sensors** tab:
```

{{<imgproc src="/services/slam/offline-mapping-imu-data.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true alt="UI showing captured sensor data">}}

### Configuration

Navigate to the **SLAM library** tab on your location page, and click `"Make new map"` on the top right and specify a map name or click `"Update map"` next to an existing map.

1. Enter the `"Robot name"`, `"Camera name"`, and optionally the `"Movement Sensor name"` of the components whose previously captured data you want to use to create or update a map. If your robot has been deleted, you can alternatively specify the `"robot ID`".

> 1. Adjust the config parameters as needed. See [config_params](#config_params) for details.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Adjust the configuration parameters as needed. See [`config_params`](#config_params) for details.
```

1. Select the timeframe of the data you'd like to use.
1. At the bottom, you can see the total number of PCD files and movement sensor data points that will be processed.
1. Click `"Generate map"`.

{{<imgproc src="/services/slam/offline-mapping-generate-map.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true alt="UI for creating a new map from captured data">}}

### View the Map

> Unlike in `Online` mode, you cannot see the map being created while the slam session is in progress, but similar to when creating or updating a map in `Online` mode, you can see that your cloud slam session is in progress from your **Location** page's **SLAM library** tab, and when all the data has been processed (or 45 minutes have passed, whichever occurs first), the map will be saved to your **Location** page's **SLAM library** tab.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unlike in `Online` mode, you cannot see the map being created while the slam session is in progress, but similar to when creating or updating a map in `Online` mode, you can see that your cloud slam session is in progress from your **Location** page's **SLAM library** tab.
When all the data has been processed (or 45 minutes have passed, whichever occurs first), the map can be accessed from your **Location** page's **SLAM library** tab.
```

        "config_params": {
          "mode": "2d"
        },
        "camera": {
          "name": "my-rplidar",
          "data_frequency_hz": "5"
        },
        "enable_mapping": false,
        "use_cloud_slam": false
      }
    }

>   ],

Reviewer 4: Maybe update the versions below, or leave them blank?

Author: Good point, I was wondering about that too... it looks like real versions are used in the JSON Template for other modular resources as well (https://docs.viam.com/modular-resources/examples/odrive/, https://docs.viam.com/modular-resources/examples/csi/, https://docs.viam.com/modular-resources/examples/rplidar/). @andf-viam would we want to put a template/placeholder value there instead?

Reviewer 3: Sure, I can update those to placeholder values, makes sense. 👍

Reviewer 3: No worries for this PR, I'll update them all afterwards.

Author: @andf-viam sounds great, thank you!
